They possessed the assurance that overwhelms endless assemblies.
They were skilled in their emancipation from cyclic existence, as they had demonstrated for many tens of millions of eons.
the great being Bhadra­pāla,
Sārtha­vāha,
Nara­datta,
Graha­datta,
Varuṇa­datta,
Indra­datta,
Uttara­mati,
Vi­śeṣa­mati,
Vardhamāna­mati,
A­mogha­darśin,
Su­saṃ­prasthita,
Su­vikrānta­vikrāmin,
Nityodyukta,
Sūrya­garbha,
Candra­garbha,
An­upama­cintin,
Śāradvatī­putra! Excellent! Excellent!
Through the blessings of the Tathā­gata you have made a splendid request.
You have had an excellent idea!
the Lord replied,
“Venerable Lord, what are all those things on which great bodhisattva beings should not be fixated?”
The Blessed One replied,
“Śāradvatī­putra, the expression ‘all things’ denotes the following:
the five psycho-physical aggregates,
the twelve sense fields,
the eighteen sensory elements,
the four noble truths,
the twelve links of dependent origination,
the four applications of mindfulness,
the four correct exertions,
the four supports for miraculous ability,
the five faculties
the seven branches of enlightenment,
the noble eightfold path,
the emptiness that is a gateway to liberation,
the signlessness that is a gateway to liberation,
the aspirationlessness that is a gateway to liberation,
the four meditative concentrations,
the four immeasurable aspirations,
the four formless meditative absorptions,
the eight aspects of liberation,
the knowledge of phenomena,
the subsequent knowledge,
the knowledge of other minds,
the knowledge of relative appearances,
the knowledge of the origin of suffering,
the knowledge of suffering,
the knowledge of the cessation of suffering,
the knowledge of the path,
the knowledge of the extinction of contaminants,
the nine contemplations of impurity,
the six aspects of perception,
the ten recollections,
the knowledge that contaminants will not be regenerated,
in the presence of these four assemblies, he demonstrated multiple miraculous forms, vivid, brilliant and distinct, which were emanated through his magical abilities.
His extreme joy gave rise to such delight
and contentment that,
rising from his seat, with his upper robe over one shoulder,
he rested his right knee on the ground
and placed his hands together in the gesture of homage, facing in the direction of Blessed One, while asking the Blessed One as follows:
“Śāradvatī­putra, since you always have had opportunities to question the Tathā­gata, you may ask whatever you wish,
and you should be satisfied with the answers to your questions.”
the meditative stability free from ideation and merely endowed with scrutiny,
the meditative stability free from both ideation and scrutiny,
the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown
the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things,
the faculties endowed with the knowledge of all things,
the eight sense fields of mastery
the ten sense fields of total consummation,
the eighteen aspects of emptiness,
the ten powers of the tathāgatas,
the four assurances,
the four unhindered discernments,
They regarded phenomena as a magical display, a mirage, a dream, the moon reflected in water, an optical aberration, empty space, an echo, a castle in the sky, or a phantom, and they were endowed with immeasurable assurance.
Their speech was honest with a smiling demeanor, their countenances without frowns of anger.
They were skilled in comprehending the mental attitudes and interests of all sentient beings, and the knowledge that engages in subtlety.
They possessed a mind with great tolerance and without animosity for any sentient being.
They were skilled in definitively introducing the nature of reality.
They had acquired an aspiration to be reborn in the infinite buddhafields.
At all times they uninterruptedly actualized the meditative stability that recollects the buddhas of countless world systems.
They were well-versed in questioning the innumerable buddhas,
and skillful in rejecting afflicted mental states motivated by diverse mistaken views.
heading many thousands of accompanying bodhisattvas, all of whom were youthful in appearance.
At that time, the Blessed One outshone Śakra, Brahmā, and all the worldly protectors. Then,
Thereupon, Senior Śāradvatī­putra, who was present within the assembly,
He was delighted. He rejoiced.
“If I might be permitted to request the Venerable Lord to pronounce on them,
may I put certain questions to the Venerable Lord?”
The Blessed One then replied to Senior Śāradvatī­putra,
Senior Śāradvatī­putra then asked the Blessed One,
Venerable Lord, what exactly is the transcendent perfection of wisdom of the bodhisattvas?
By perfecting what sacred doctrine do bodhisattvas perfect the transcendent perfection of wisdom and
the Blessed One addressed Senior Śāradvatī­putra as follows:
“Śāradvatī­putra, the ‘five psycho-physical aggregates’ comprise
 physical forms,  feelings,  perceptions,  formative predispositions, and  consciousness.
“If you ask what are the ‘twelve sense fields,’
they comprise six that are inner and six that are outer.
These are called the twelve sense fields.
Among them, if you ask what are the ‘six inner sense fields,’
“If you ask what are the ‘eighteen sensory elements,’
they comprise  the sensory element of the eyes,  the sensory element of sights, and  the sensory element of visual consciousness;  the sensory element of the ears,  the sensory element of sounds, and  the sensory element of auditory consciousness;  the sensory element of the nose,  the sensory element of odors, and  the sensory element of olfactory consciousness;  the sensory element of the tongue,  the sensory element of tastes, and  the sensory element of gustatory consciousness;  the sensory element of the body,  the sensory element of tangibles, and  the sensory element of tactile consciousness; and  the sensory element of the mental faculty,  the sensory element of mental phenomena, and  the sensory element of mental consciousness.
These are called the eighteen sensory elements.
“If you ask what are the ‘four noble truths,’
they comprise  the noble truth of suffering,  the noble truth of the origin of suffering,  the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and  the noble truth of the path.
These are called the four noble truths.
“If you ask what are the ‘twelve links of dependent origination,’
 name and form, which arise contingent on consciousness;
 sensory contact, which arises contingent on the six sense fields;
 the six sense fields, which arise contingent on name and form;
Through the cessation of formative predispositions, consciousness ceases.
Through the cessation of consciousness, name and form cease.
Through the cessation of name and form, the six sense fields cease.
Through the cessation of the six sense fields, sensory contact ceases.
Through the cessation of sensory contact, sensation ceases.
Through the cessation of sensation, craving ceases.
Through the cessation of craving, grasping ceases.
Through the cessation of grasping, the rebirth process ceases.
Through the cessation of the rebirth process, actual birth ceases.
Through the cessation of actual birth, aging and death cease;
It is in this way that these corporeal aggregates, exclusively endowed with suffering, cease.
 the application of mindfulness which, with regard to feelings, observes feelings;
 the application of mindfulness which, with regard to the mind, observes the mind;
These are called the four applications of mindfulness.
“If you ask what are the ‘four correct exertions,’
These are called the four correct exertions.
“If you ask what are the ‘four supports for miraculous abilities,’
 the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion,
 the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of mind with the formative force of exertion,
These are called the four supports for miraculous ability.
“If you ask what are the ‘five faculties,’
 the faculty of perseverance,
 the faculty of recollection,
 the faculty of meditative stability,
and  the faculty of wisdom.
These are called the five faculties.
“If you ask what are the ‘five powers,’
 the power of perseverance,
and  the power of wisdom
These are called the five powers.
“If you ask what are the ‘seven branches of enlightenment,’
 the branch of enlightenment that entails correct doctrinal analysis,
 the branch of enlightenment that entails correct perseverance,
 the branch of enlightenment that entails correct delight,
 the branch of enlightenment that entails correct mental and physical refinement,
 the branch of enlightenment that entails correct meditative stability,
and  the branch of enlightenment that entails correct equanimity.
These are called the seven branches of enlightenment.
“If you ask what is the ‘noble eightfold path,’
 correct ideation,
 correct speech,
 correct action,
 correct livelihood,
These are the branches of the noble eightfold path.
“If you ask what is ‘emptiness as a gateway to liberation,’
This is called signlessness as a gateway to liberation.
These are called the four immeasurable aspirations.
“If you ask what are the ‘four formless meditative absorptions,’
These are called the four formless meditative absorptions.
 The first aspect of liberation ensues when corporeal beings observe physical forms [in order to compose the mind].
is aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation.
This is called aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation.
“If you ask what are the ‘four meditative concentrations,’
thinking, ‘There is nothing at all.’
the sense field of nothing-at-all has been completely transcended in all respects
These are called the eight aspects of liberation.
These are called the nine serial steps of meditative equipoise.
“If you ask what are the ‘nine contemplations of impurity,’
 contemplation of a worm-infested corpse,
 contemplation of a bloody corpse,
 contemplation of a putrefied corpse,
 contemplation of a blue-black corpse,
 contemplation of a devoured corpse,
 contemplation of a dismembered corpse,
 contemplation of a skeleton,
and  contemplation of an immolated corpse
These are called the nine contemplations of impurity.
“If you ask what are the ‘ten recollections,’
 recollection of the Dharma,
 recollection of the Saṅgha,
 recollection of ethical discipline,
 recollection of renunciation,
 recollection of the god realms,
 recollection of quiescence,
 recollection of death.
“If you ask what are the ‘six aspects of perception
 perception of suffering,
 perception of non-self,
 perception of unattractiveness,
 perception of death,
and  perception of disinterest in all mundane things.
These are called the six aspects of perception.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of phenomena,’
it is the limited understanding that the five psycho-physical aggregates are to be purified.
This is called knowledge of phenomena.
“If you ask what is ‘subsequent knowledge,’
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of other minds,’
it is the absence of doubt with regard to phenomena associated with the minds and mental states of other sentient beings and other individuals.
This is called knowledge of other minds.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of relative appearances,
This is called the knowledge of relative appearances.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of suffering,
it is the understanding of how suffering arises and endures.
That is called the knowledge of suffering.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the origin of suffering,’
it is the understanding that the origin of suffering is to be abandoned.
This is called knowledge of the origin of suffering.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the cessation of suffering,’
it is the understanding that suffering has ceased.
This is called knowledge of the cessation of suffering.
it is the understanding of the noble eightfold path.
This is called knowledge of the path leading to the cessation of suffering.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge of the extinction of contaminants,’
it is the understanding that desire, hatred, and delusion have ended.
This is called the extinction of contaminants.
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge that contaminants will not be regenerated,’
“If you ask what is the ‘knowledge that is definitive,’
it is the tathāgatas’ pristine cognition of omniscience.
This is called the knowledge that is definitive.
“If you ask what are the ‘faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown,’
the sense field of infinite space has been completely transcended in all respects,
These are called the eight sense fields of mastery.
“If you ask what are the ‘ten sense fields of total consummation,’
 the total consummation of the water element,
 the total consummation of the fire element,
 the total consummation of the wind element,
 the total consummation of the space element,
 the total consummation of blueness,
 the total consummation of yellowness,
 the total consummation of redness,
 the total consummation of whiteness,
and  the total consummation of consciousness.
These are called the ten sense fields of total consummation.
 considering all elements to be present in the earth element,
 considering all elements to be present in the water element,
 considering all elements to be present in the wind element,
 considering all elements to be present in the space element,
 considering all elements to be present in blueness,
all of them are transformed into blueness;
 considering all elements to be present in yellowness,
all of them are transformed exclusively into yellowness;
 considering all elements to be present in redness,
all of them are transformed exclusively into redness;
 considering all elements to be present in whiteness,
all of them are transformed exclusively into whiteness;
and  considering all elements to be present in consciousness,
 considering all elements to be present in consciousness,
all of them are transformed exclusively into consciousness.
earth, water, fire, wind, space, blueness, yellowness, redness, whiteness, and consciousness are all transformed exclusively into a single element.
they are also known as sense fields of total consummation because each element is respectively transformed into all the others.
“If you ask what are the ‘eighteen aspects of emptiness,’
 emptiness of both external and internal phenomena,
 emptiness of emptiness,
 emptiness of great extent,
 emptiness of ultimate reality,
 emptiness of conditioned phenomena,
 emptiness of unconditioned phenomena,
 emptiness of the unlimited,
 emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end,
 emptiness of non-dispersal,
 emptiness of inherent existence,
 emptiness of non-apprehension,
 emptiness of non-entities,
 emptiness of essential nature,
and  emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities.
“If, among them, you ask what is the ‘emptiness of internal phenomena,’
the term ‘internal phenomena’ comprises
the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mental faculty.
it is because that is their very nature.
That is what is called the emptiness of internal phenomena.
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of external phenomena,’
the term ‘external phenomena’ comprises
sights, sounds, odors, tastes, tangibles, and mental phenomena.
that is because it is their very nature.
If you ask why,
If you ask why
it is because that is their very nature.
That is called the emptiness of external phenomena.
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of both external and internal phenomena,’
the term ‘external and internal phenomena’ comprises the six inner sense fields and the six outer sense fields.
that is because it is their very nature.
That is called the emptiness of external and internal phenomena.
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of emptiness,’
That is called the emptiness of emptiness.
the eastern direction is empty of the eastern direction because it does not endure and does not disintegrate.
it is because that is its very nature.
the knowledge that is definitive, and similarly,
the meditative stability endowed with ideation and scrutiny,
great loving kindness,
great compassion,
the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas,
and likewise, the understanding of all phenomena,
the understanding of the aspects of the path,
the understanding of omniscience,
the six transcendent perfections,
the five extrasensory powers,
the five eyes,
the thirty-two major marks of a superior man,
and the eighty excellent minor marks.
All these are the things on which great bodhisattva beings should not be fixated.
One who is without fixation perfects the transcendent perfection of wisdom and
Then Senior Śāradvatī­putra asked the Blessed One,
Venerable Lord, what are the ‘five psycho-physical aggregates’ and likewise [those other phenomena], up to and including the ‘twelve links of dependent origination’?
What are the ‘four applications of mindfulness’, and likewise [those other causal attributes] up to and including the ‘noble eightfold path’?
What is the ‘emptiness that is a gateway to liberation,’ and likewise [those other attainments], up to and including ‘omniscience’?
What are the ‘six transcendent perfections,’ and likewise [those other fruitional attributes], up to and including the ‘eighty minor marks’?”
 consciousness, which arises contingent on formative predispositions;
the zenith is empty of the zenith,
while the nadir is empty of the nadir,
That is called the emptiness of great extent.
That is called the emptiness of ultimate reality.
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of great extent,’
“If you ask what is the ‘emptiness of conditioned phenomena,’
It is in this way that these great corporeal aggregates, exclusively endowed with suffering, arise.